---
title: "_Mir'at√º'l-Memalik_ (pt. 5 of 7)"
---

## IX. Our experience in Bakhtar-Zemin, i.e., in Kabulistan

In the beginning of the month Djemazi-ul-Evvel we left the river Nilab and
turned toward Kabul. For fear of the Afghans under Adam Khan, we made a quick
march through the night, and at daybreak we arrived at the foot of the mountain.
So far the Afghans had not seen us, but by the time we had reached the top there
were thousands of them gathered together. We seized our guns, and with God's
help managed to get out of their way, and came to the town of Pershuer, i.e.,
Peshawer. Soon after, we crossed the Khaiber Pass, and reached Djushai. In the
mountains we saw two rhinoceroses (Kerkedans),^[Kerkedan, generally translated
by Rhinoceros. Baber (1356) makes mention of this animal under the name of
gherek, and he describes it as being about the size of a buffalo.] each the size
of a small elephant; they have a horn on their nose about two inches long. In
Abyssinia these animals are much more plentiful.

Presently we reached Laghman,^[Perhaps more correctly Lughman, east of Kabul.]
and after a very toilsome journey through Hezareland,^[Hezare is the name of the
mountainous region northeast of Peshawer; also the name of an Iranian Mongol
tribe dwelling between Herat and Kabul.] we entered Kabulistan and its capital,
Kabul. Here I visited the two sons of Humayun, Mehemmed Hekim Mirza and Ferrukh
Fal Mirza; I also saw Mun'im Khan, and after presenting the ferman from Humayun,
I was treated with much honour. Kabul itself is a beautiful city, surrounded by
mountains covered with snow, and pleasure-gardens with running brooks. Pleasure
and merriment prevailed everywhere, feasting and banqueting were the order of
the day. In every corner were gaily dressed, slender Lulis^[Luli is, in Central
Asia, the name given to the Gipsies, to which tribe the dancing and singing
damsels and the prostitutes generally belonged. This used also to be the case in
Turkey.] enticing one with music and song to join the merry crowd; the populace,
in fact, seemed to have no thought for anything but for pleasure and enjoyment.

"Who would long for Huris and the Paradise, whose good fortune has brought him
amongst the Lulis of Kabul?"

We, however, had no time for such frivolities; our only aim and object was to
reach home as soon as possible. Mun'im Khan remarked that the roads were snowed
up, that the Hindu Kush could not possibly be passed, and that it would be far
better for us to wait a few days in Kabul; but I quickly replied that men could
overcome mountains, if they had the mind to do so. Thereupon the Governor
commanded Mir Nezri, the Chief of the Ferashi and Peshai, to accompany me, and
his men were to conduct our horses and goods safely across the mountain pass. We
left accordingly in the beginning of Djemazi-ul-Evvel and came to
Karabag,^[Kara-bag (black-garden), marked on the maps merely as Bag (garden).
Tcharikar lies north of Kabul, and Pervane lies in the same direction as the
Pass of that name at the foot of the Hindu Kush. Our author did not take the
route now generally used, across the Dendanshiken (tooth-breaker), but the
other, which lies more to the east, and which was the one followed by Baber.]
and from there to Tcharikar and Pervane or Mervan.

This was Nezri's native country. He collected his men, and they took us across
to the other side of the mountain. It was a very difficult passage, but we
accomplished it that day, and spent the night in a village at the foot of the
pass.

## X. The condition of Badakhshan and Khatlan {#ch-x}

Early in the month of Redjeb we came to the city of Anderab, and journeyed from
there through Badakhshan to Talikan, where I had an interview with Suleiman
Shah^[Suleiman Shah was the son of Khan Mirza the Wise, a cousin of Baber's. He
had usurped the throne of Badakhshan in 1508, and was afterwards established by
Humayun as ruler over the whole of the Upper Oxus territory.] and his son
Ibrahim Mirza. On the day of our arrival the Mirza had met us, and received me
in his pleasure-garden; I offered him some presents and a Ghazel. The Mirza, who
understood poetry, entered into a poetical competition with me, and introduced
me next day to his father, to whom I also offered gifts and a Ghazel. The
Sovereign also showed me much attention, and loaded me with signs of his favour.

There was hostility between Pir Mohammed Khan, the ruler of Balkh, and Borak
Khan, the ruler of Transoxania, and the roads were made unsafe; the more so as
Pir Mohammed's younger brother had raised a revolt in Kunduz, Kavadian, and
Termed, which districts were now in great tumult. They advised me therefore to
travel by the way of Badakhshan and Khatlan,^[From the political condition
already referred to, it is quite evident why our author chose this very
difficult, roundabout route past Badakhshan, the same route which was taken by
Sheibani Khan, Baber's adversary, during his campaign against Khosru Shah. Part
of ancient Khatlan, also called Khotl, is now included in the Province of
Kulab.] and both Suleiman and his son presented me with horses and garments of
honour, besides giving me a letter of recommendation to Djihanghir Ali, the
ruler of Khatlan, who had married his younger sister; and so I journeyed to
Kishm, the capital of Badakhshan.^[Feizabad is now the capital of Badakhshan. It
was Suleiman Shah who made Kishm his residence.]

I saw the Sovereign's pleasure-garden, and Humayun's garden Duabe, and proceeded
from Kalai Zafar^[Kalai Zafar (castle of victory) is situated on the Koktche, a
tributary of the Oxus.] to Rustak, and from there to Bender Semti.^[Now Semti,
on the left side of the Pendje.] I approached Dalli, in Khatlan, from the
Kashgar (eastern?) side, and made a pilgrimage to the grave of Seid Ali
Hamadani, and from there I went to Kulaba,^[Now Kulab (1810 ft. above the sea),
situated on a tributary of the Oxus.] where I met with Djihanghir Ali Khan; and
after presenting my letter of recommendation he gave me an escort of 50 men to
conduct me to Charsui, where I crossed the Pul-i-Senghin^[Neither Charsui nor
Pul-i-Senghin are to be found on any modern map, but as the author identifies
Hissar with Chaganian, i.e. places the former in the cominion of the latter
province, we may take it that the Kafirnihan River was then the boundary line of
Transoxania.] (stone bridge), and dismissed the men who had escorted us.

## XI. Events in Turan, i.e. Transoxania {#ch-xi}

On the day that I crossed the bridge, I first set foot on Transoxanian soil.
After a day's rest I proceeded to Bazar No (New Market), and from there to a
little place called Tchiharshembe, where I visited the grave of the Khodja
Yaakub Tcharkhi. Then on to Tchaganian, i.e. Hissar-i-Shadman.^[Hissar, situated
at the confluence of the Ilek and the Khanka-Derya, formerly knownas
Hissar-i-Shadman.] I visited Timur Sultan, the Kagalga^[Probably an ancient
title which in its present form is not mentioned in any lexicons or
vocabularies.] of the Ozbeg rulers, and passed Mount Senghirdek,^[Senghirdek is
mentioned on the modern maps of Central Asia, between Sehri-Sebz and Sari-Asiya
(Yellow Mill), as the name of a stream and of a place, but not as the name of a
mountain. Seng-ghirdek means: a stone tent.] where it always rains and a
considerable stream is formed at the foot of the mountain, and I marveled at the
wonderful works of God. The next station was Sehri-Sebz, i.e., Kesh, where I met
Hashim Sultan, who gave me permission to continue my journey to Samarkand. With
great difficulty we got across the mountain^[This must be mount Karatepe (Black
Hill) (518 ft.).] situated between the two last-named places; we touched the
little town of Mazar, and in the beginning of Shaaban we reached Samarkand,
which is a perfect paradise.

Here I saw Borak Khan^[Borak Khan, a son of Mahmud Khan, who was defeated by
Sheibani. He was a native of the steppes in the Northeast of Transoxania and,
favoured by the bad government of Burham Khan, he and his horsemen, consisting
of Kirghises and Kalmuks, invaded the land, and took possession of the capital,
Samarkand. He died in the year 963 (1555). The incidents connected with his
reign which our author mentions are the more valuable to us as we find no
mention of them anywhere else.] (more correctly called Noruz Ahmed), who, in
return for my humble offerings, gave me a horse and garments of honour. It was
this same Borak Khan to whom his Majesty the Padishah had sent cannon and guns
by the hand of Sheikhs Abdullatif and Dadash. At the time of my arrival
Abdullatif Khan, the ruler of Samarkand, was dead,^[He died in the year 959
(1551).] and Borak had taken his place. Pir Mohammed Khan in Balkh, and Burhan
Seid Khan^[Called by abbreviation Burhan Khan, an uncle of Obeidullah. He
reigned only a short time and died in 964 (1556).] in Bokhara, declared their
independence, and Borak's first business was to settle this matter. He began by
taking Samarkand and proceeded to Shehr-i-Sebz, where a great battle was fought,
in which the Ketkhuda (overseer) of the Osman soldiers fell. He then took the
stronghold and marched to Bokhara, which place he laid siege to. Seid Burhan,
the ruler of Bokhara, made peace with Borak, relinquished the place to him, and
retired to Karakul, where the brother of Pir Mohammed Khan then reigned. He,
however, gave up the place to Seid Burhan.

When Borak Khan entered Samarkand, the Aga of the Osmans^[Aga of the Osmans was
the title of a commander of the Janissaries which Sultan Suleiman had sent from
Constantinople to Samarkand to support the authority of the Eastern Turks. Our
author therefore came here unexpectedly in contact with his countrymen.] had
just started with few men on their way to Turkey, having taken the way of
Tashkend and Turkestan. Ahmed Tchaush was also on the point of returning to
Turkey by the way of Bokhara and Kharezm, for part of the Janissaries had
enlisted under Seid Burhan, and the remainder joined his son. About 150 remained
faithful to Borak Khan. When he had communicated all this to me, he added: "I am
now as a liar before his Majesty the Sultan of Turkey, for I can do nothing, but
if thou wilt help me, something may yet be done." He offered me the government
of a Province, but I said that with such a small army nothing could be done;
moreover that without the consent of my Padishah, I could not stir in the
matter. He thereupon proposed to send an envoy to the Sublime Porte to explain
the situation. As a matter of fact he had already decided to send Sadr Alem, a
descendant of Khodja Ahmed Jesewi,^[Khodja Ahmad Jesewi, the Patron-saint of
Turkestan, whose grave in Aulia Ata is to this day eagerly visited by pilgrims.]
and gave him a letter in which he expressed his willingness in the future to
satisfy every wish of the Sultan. He discharged me, however.

During my stay in Samarkand I made a pilgrimage to the grave of the prophet
Daniel, to the place of the Khidr (Elias), to the cloak and to the wooden shoes
of the Prophet, and also to the Koran written by Ali himself.^[When in Samarkand
I could learn nothing about the cloak and the Naalin (wooden shoes) of the
Prophet, but the copy of the Koran here referred to was extant in the Mausoleum
of Timur. This latter however, although a very old Manuscript in Kufi letters,
has not descended from Kaliph Ali, nor yet from Kaliph Osman; it has been
brought to Turkestan by the descendants of Khodja Ahrar, and from Samarkand the
Russians took it to St. Petersburg.] Besides these places I visited the graves
of the following sheikhs and sages: the author of Hidayet, Ebu Mansur Matridi;
Shah-Zinde, Khodja Abdullah, Khodja Abdi-birun, Khodja Abdi-derum, the
Tchopanata, and the Kazizade of Rum, and the grave of the 444,000 Transoxanian
sages.

But to return to Borak Khan. One day, while talking together, he asked me which
of all the cities I had visited pleased me most. I replied with the following
stanza:

> "Far from home no one longs for Paradise.\
> For in his eyes his native town is superior even to Baghdad."

"Thou hast spoken well," said the Khan.

Now as regards the embassage to Constantinople, Sadr Alem proposed to go by
Turkestan; but when he was told that the Nogai tribe of the Mangit committed
violence upon travelers, and that the roads swarmed with robbers and highwaymen
who gave no quarter to Musulmans,^[Consequently they belonged at the time to the
Shaman faith, and interesting fact and easily explained when we consider that at
the time of Timur, both Kirghizes and Turkomans are described as heathen.] but
plundered and ill-treated any that came in their way, he decided to travel
through Bokhara. Unfortunately, just then the news came that Seid Burhan had
again declared war with Borak Khan, and that the latter's son Kharezm Shah had
been attacked. Borak Khan advised me thereupon to remain at Ghidjduvan until the
return of the envoy. If no hostilities took place we might travel by that way,
but otherwise we were to wait until he sent some one to conduct us safely
through Bokhara. To this I agreed. On the fifth of Ramazan we started, touched
Kala and Kermineh, crossed the river of Samarkand^[Its name is Zerefshan or
Kohik.] at Duabe, and so arrived at Ghidjduvan,^[Ghidjduvan, the most northerly
town of the Khanate on the Wafkend river.] where I visited the grave of Khodja
Abdul Khalik.

As the Mirza (?) was not here, and no news concerning him could be obtained, we
went on to Pul Rabat. Meanwhile the troops of Prince Kharezm Shah had prepared
for battle. Suddenly Khan Ali Bey, the Prince's tutor, accosted us with the
question whither we were going. When I replied: "To Bokhara," he said: "Seid
Burhan, the ruler of Bokhara, threatens to attack Prince Kharezm Shah, and we
pray thee to help us." "How now!" I cried, "we help no man; Borak Khan has not
requested us to do so; on the contrary, he has charged us to go to Ghidjduvan,
and there to await the return of the envoy." So we continued on our way.

As we approached Minar (Spire) about 100 redcoats (Ala tehapan) rushed down upon
us, crying: "In the name of the Mirza, turn back," and at the same time they
struck one of my companions. Immediately we prepared to fight, when a Seid
sprang forward and commanded the Ozbegs to stop. Both sides held back, and the
Seid announced that the Mirza sent us greeting and desired us not to proceed any
farther, but to look on from a distance. So we were compelled to turn back. With
ten of my companions I had an interview with the Mirza, who renewed his request
that we should help him; but I refused again, whereupon ten guns were forcibly
taken from us, and we were commanded to remain mere spectators. The Prince's
bearing was very haughty before he had sighted the enemy, for as the proverb
says:

> "Our own fist is always of iron,\
> Until we receive the first box on the ear."

But no sooner had Seid Burhan appeared in sight from the opposite direction,
than the Prince retreated across the bridge to the Rabat (Karvanserai). I went
on with six companions, which I left behind me in the court of the kiosk. Seid
Burhan advanced with 1,000 Kizil-Ayaks, i.e., young men from Bokhara, and 40
Turkish archers, therefore well equipped for war. In a moment he defeated the
Prince---who, being wounded by a bullet, took flight, leaving his colours,
musical and other military instruments behind him on the battle-field. Of my
three companions which fled with the Prince, one was wounded by a lance and died
soon after; and while the others retreated with the Ozbegs into the Rabat, where
they were attacked by Seid Burhan, I went on to meet the army to inquire after
the Mirza, leaving my horse in charge of two men. I heard that he was quartered
close to the Rabat, and asked to be conducted into his presence; and just as I
was crossing the bridge, attended by a few men, some villain wounded me with an
arrow. This was the signal for a general attack; swords were raised on all
sides, and I was very near losing my life.

Fortunately the attack had been witnessed by the Osmans serving under the Khan;
they had recognized me, and came to my rescue, calling out: "This man is the
guest of our Prince, what then is the meaning of this?" The Ozbeghi (commander
of 10 men) immediately stopped the attack and apprized the Khan of what had
taken place, whereupon the latter, a glorious youth, hastened to me, embraced
me, and begged my forgiveness, for it was by accident, he said, that I had
become mixed up in the battle, and I had been attacked on the principle of the
proverb which says: 'Wet and dry burn together.' He commissioned two officers to
conduct us over the bridge, during which transport two more of my people were
attacked, and received sword wounds. I lost on this occasion a beautiful
led-horse, all my cooking apparatus, one pack-horse, and 10 saddle-horses, which
were stolen by the soldiers.

With much difficulty I got across the bridge; and while I was resting at a
little distance, the Khan, to please me, ordered the Turkish soldiers stationed
in the Rabat to hand the place over to me, as we were innocent and free from all
reproach. As I approached the place I called out: "Stop fighting; I am here, and
the Khan will pardon you for my sake." Thus the Rabat fell into my hands, and
with it some of the lost horses, but many of the firearms were irrevocably lost.
My two men who had been taken prisoner in the fight had escaped, and so we
proceeded to the town, which we reached that night. Seid Burhan spoke thus to
me: "Be thou my guide in this and in the next world; this land shall henceforth
belong to thy Padishah, thou shalt rule in Bokhara and I will retire to
Karakol." "Not so," was my reply, "if thou gave me the whole land of Transoxania
I could not stay here. Know, O Khan! that I shall report before the Sublime
Porte the injustice which has been done to thee, and my glorious Padishah will
be gracious unto thee, and possibly the government of these provinces will be
entrusted to thy care."

These words pleased the Khan; he gave a banquet in my honour and showed me much
kindness, and during the fortnight which I spent in Bokhara he visited me every
day in the pleasure-garden which served as my residence. I composed a Ghazel in
his honour, which highly delighted him and led to many poetical discussions.
When at last I desired permission to continue my journey, he demanded of me that
I should give him our iron guns in exchange for his brass ones. He pressed me so
hard that I was compelled to give in, and received 40 brass muskets in return
for all the iron ones which we had left. I also had to exchange my led-horse for
a gelding, besides giving him two precious books.

Meanwhile the envoy from Borak Khan had arrived, who apologized to me for his
son (Kharezm Shah), and made peace with Seid Burhan through the mediation of the
Ghidjduvani Abdul Sultan. Thus peace and security were once more restored.

I delayed in Bokhara to make pilgrimages to the graves of Bahaeddin Nakishbendi,
Kazi Khan, Tchar Bekir, Khodja Ebn Hifz Kebir, Sadr esh-Sheriat, Tadj
esh-Sheriat, Seid Mir Kelal (the spiritual head of Baha-eddin), Sultan Ismail
the Samanide, Eyub and Sarakhsi; and after that I journeyed to Kharezm.

Our way led first to Karakol, then to Farab where we crossed the Oxus in ships,
and early in the month Shavval I touched Iranian soil, namely Khorassan. The
first town I stopped at was Tchardjui,^[Tchardjui (more correctly Tchihar-djui =
four brooks, after four tributaries of the Oxus which are there), was at that
time Persian territory, and came only to be reckoned to Bokhara after the
seizure of Abdullah Khan.] where I visited the grave of Khodja Meshed, a brother
of Imam Ali Musa.^[Name of the Shiite Saint in Meshed.] Then we took the road
through the wilderness^[Consequently the left side of the river.] to Kharezm. By
day and by night we had to wage war against lions;^[Curious it seems that 300
years ago lions were so plentiful in those parts, while in modern times there
has been no sign of them in the steppes of Turkestan.] it was not safe for one
man to go alone to draw water; but at last, after ten days of unutterable
weariness, we reached Hezaresp, and from there in five days, Khiva, where I
visited the grave of Pehlevan Mahmud Pir.
